325.--AN EPISCOPAL VISITATION.

[Illustration]

In the diagram I show how the bishop may be made to visit every one of
his white parishes in seventeen moves. It is obvious that we must start
from one corner square and end at the one that is diagonally opposite to
it. The puzzle cannot be solved in fewer than seventeen moves.


326.--A NEW COUNTER PUZZLE.

Play as follows: 2--3, 9--4, 10--7, 3--8, 4--2, 7--5, 8--6, 5--10, 6--9,
2--5, 1--6, 6--4, 5--3, 10--8, 4--7, 3--2, 8--1, 7--10. The white
counters have now changed places with the red ones, in eighteen moves,
without breaking the conditions.


327.--A NEW BISHOP'S PUZZLE.

[Illustration: A]

[Illustration: B]

Play as follows, using the notation indicated by the numbered squares in
Diagram A:--

      White.   |   Black.   |   White.    |    Black.
    1. 18--15  |  1. 3--6   | 10. 20--10  |  10. 1--11
    2. 17--8   |  2. 4--13  | 11. 3--9    |  11. 18--12
    3. 19--14  |  3. 2--7   | 12. 10--13  |  12. 11--8
    4. 15--5   |  4. 6--16  | 13. 19--16  |  13. 2--5
    5. 8--3    |  5. 13-18  | 14. 16--1   |  14. 5--20
    6. 14--9   |  6. 7--12  | 15. 9--6    |  15. 12--15
    7. 5--10   |  7. 16-11  | 16. 13-7    |  16. 8--14
    8. 9--19   |  8. 12--2  | 17. 6--3    |  17. 15-18
    9. 10--4   |  9. 11-17  | 18. 7--2    |  18. 14--19

Diagram B shows the position after the ninth move. Bishops at 1 and 20
have not yet moved, but 2 and 19 have sallied forth and returned. In the
end, 1 and 19, 2 and 20, 3 and 17, and 4 and 18 will have exchanged
places. Note the position after the thirteenth move.

328.--THE QUEEN'S TOUR.

[Illustration]

The annexed diagram shows a second way of performing the Queen's Tour.
If you break the line at the point J and erase the shorter portion of
that line, you will have the required path solution for any J square. If
you break the line at I, you will have a non-re-entrant solution
starting from any I square. And if you break the line at G, you will
have a solution for any G square. The Queen's Tour previously given may
be similarly broken at three different places, but I seized the
opportunity of exhibiting a second tour.


329.--THE STAR PUZZLE.

The illustration explains itself. The stars are all struck out in
fourteen straight strokes, starting and ending at a white star.

[Illustration]


330.--THE YACHT RACE.

The diagram explains itself. The numbers will show the direction of the
lines in their proper order, and it will be seen that the seventh course
ends at the flag-buoy, as stipulated.

[Illustration]


331.--THE SCIENTIFIC SKATER.

In this case we go beyond the boundary of the square. Apart from that,
the moves are all queen moves. There are three or four ways in which it
can be done.

Here is one way of performing the feat:--

[Illustration]

It will be seen that the skater strikes out all the stars in one
continuous journey of fourteen straight lines, returning to the point
from which he started. To follow the skater's course in the diagram it
is necessary always to go as far as we can in a straight line before
turning.


332.--THE FORTY-NINE STARS.

The illustration shows how all the stars may be struck out in twelve
straight strokes, beginning and ending at a black star.

[Illustration]


333.--THE QUEEN'S JOURNEY.

The correct solution to this puzzle is shown in the diagram by the dark
line. The five moves indicated will take the queen the greatest distance
that it is possible for her to go in five moves, within the conditions.
The dotted line shows the route that most people suggest, but it is not
quite so long as the other. Let us assume that the distance from the
centre of any square to the centre of the next in the same horizontal or
vertical line is 2 inches, and that the queen travels from the centre of
her original square to the centre of the one at which she rests. Then
the first route will be found to exceed 67.9 inches, while the dotted
route is less than 67.8 inches. The difference is small, but it is
sufficient to settle the point as to the longer route. All other routes
are shorter still than these two.

[Illustration]


334.--ST. GEORGE AND THE DRAGON.

We select for the solution of this puzzle one of the prettiest designs
that can be formed by representing the moves of the knight by lines from
square to square. The chequering of the squares is omitted to give
greater clearness. St. George thus slays the Dragon in strict accordance
with the conditions and in the elegant manner we should expect of him.

[Illustration: St. George and the Dragon.]


335.--FARMER LAWRENCE'S CORNFIELDS.

There are numerous solutions to this little agricultural problem. The
version I give in the next column is rather curious on account of the
long parallel straight lines formed by some of the moves.

[Illustration: Farmer Lawrence's Cornfields.]


336.--THE GREYHOUND PUZZLE.

There are several interesting points involved in this question. In the
first place, if we had made no stipulation as to the positions of the
two ends of the string, it is quite impossible to form any such string
unless we begin and end in the top and bottom row of kennels. We may
begin in the top row and end in the bottom (or, of course, the reverse),
or we may begin in one of these rows and end in the same. But we can
never begin or end in one of the two central rows. Our places of
starting and ending, however, were fixed for us. Yet the first half of
our route must be confined entirely to those squares that are
distinguished in the following diagram by circles, and the second half
will therefore be confined to the squares that are not circled. The
squares reserved for the two half-strings will be seen to be symmetrical
and similar.

The next point is that the first half-string must end in one of the
central rows, and the second half-string must begin in one of these
rows. This is now obvious, because they have to link together to form
the complete string, and every square on an outside row is connected by
a knight's move with similar squares only--that is, circled or
non-circled as the case may be. The half-strings can, therefore, only be
linked in the two central rows.

[Illustration]

Now, there are just eight different first half-strings, and consequently
also eight second half-strings. We shall see that these combine to form
twelve complete strings, which is the total number that exist and the
correct solution of our puzzle. I do not propose to give all the routes
at length, but I will so far indicate them that if the reader has
dropped any he will be able to discover which they are and work them out
for himself without any difficulty. The following numbers apply to those
in the above diagram.

The eight first half-strings are: 1 to 6 (2 routes); 1 to 8 (1 route);
1 to 10 (3 routes); 1 to 12 (1 route); and 1 to 14 (1 route). The eight
second half-strings are: 7 to 20 (1 route); 9 to 20 (1 route); 11 to 20
(3 routes); 13 to 20 (1 route); and 15 to 20 (2 routes). Every different
way in which you can link one half-string to another gives a different
solution. These linkings will be found to be as follows: 6 to 13 (2
cases); 10 to 13 (3 cases); 8 to 11 (3 cases); 8 to 15 (2 cases); 12 to
9 (1 case); and 14 to 7 (1 case). There are, therefore, twelve different
linkings and twelve different answers to the puzzle. The route given in
the illustration with the greyhound will be found to consist of one of
the three half-strings 1 to 10, linked to the half-string 13 to 20. It
should be noted that ten of the solutions are produced by five
distinctive routes and their reversals--that is, if you indicate these
five routes by lines and then turn the diagrams upside down you will get
the five other routes. The remaining two solutions are symmetrical
(these are the cases where 12 to 9 and 14 to 7 are the links), and
consequently they do not produce new solutions by reversal.


337.--THE FOUR KANGAROOS.

[Illustration]

A pretty symmetrical solution to this puzzle is shown in the diagram.
Each of the four kangaroos makes his little excursion and returns to his
corner, without ever entering a square that has been visited by another
kangaroo and without crossing the central line. It will at once occur to
the reader, as a possible improvement of the puzzle, to divide the board
by a central vertical line and make the condition that this also shall
not be crossed. This would mean that each kangaroo had to confine
himself to a square 4 by 4, but it would be quite impossible, as I shall
explain in the next two puzzles.


338.--THE BOARD IN COMPARTMENTS.

[Illustration]

In attempting to solve this problem it is first necessary to take the
two distinctive compartments of twenty and twelve squares respectively
and analyse them with a view to determining where the necessary points
of entry and exit lie. In the case of the larger compartment it will be
found that to complete a tour of it we must begin and end on two of the
outside squares on the long sides. But though you may start at any one
of these ten squares, you are restricted as to those at which you can
end, or (which is the same thing) you may end at whichever of these you
like, provided you begin your tour at certain particular squares. In the
case of the smaller compartment you are compelled to begin and end at
one of the six squares lying at the two narrow ends of the compartments,
but similar restrictions apply as in the other instance. A very little
thought will show that in the case of the two small compartments you
must begin and finish at the ends that lie together, and it then
follows that the tours in the larger compartments must also start and
end on the contiguous sides.

In the diagram given of one of the possible solutions it will be seen
that there are eight places at which we may start this particular tour;
but there is only one route in each case, because we must complete the
compartment in which we find ourself before passing into another. In any
solution we shall find that the squares distinguished by stars must be
entering or exit points, but the law of reversals leaves us the option
of making the other connections either at the diamonds or at the
circles. In the solution worked out the diamonds are used, but other
variations occur in which the circle squares are employed instead. I
think these remarks explain all the essential points in the puzzle,
which is distinctly instructive and interesting.


339.--THE FOUR KNIGHTS' TOURS.

[Illustration]

It will be seen in the illustration how a chessboard may be divided into
four parts, each of the same size and shape, so that a complete
re-entrant knight's tour may be made on each portion. There is only one
possible route for each knight and its reversal.


340.--THE CUBIC KNIGHT'S TOUR.

[Illustration]

If the reader should cut out the above diagram, fold it in the form of a
cube, and stick it together by the strips left for that purpose at the
edges, he would have an interesting little curiosity. Or he can make one
on a larger scale for himself. It will be found that if we imagine the
cube to have a complete chessboard on each of its sides, we may start
with the knight on any one of the 384 squares, and make a complete tour
of the cube, always returning to the starting-point. The method of
passing from one side of the cube to another is easily understood, but,
of course, the difficulty consisted in finding the proper points of
entry and exit on each board, the order in which the different boards
should be taken, and in getting arrangements that would comply with the
required conditions.


341.--THE FOUR FROGS.

The fewest possible moves, counting every move separately, are sixteen.
But the puzzle may be solved in seven plays, as follows, if any number
of successive moves by one frog count as a single play. All the moves
contained within a bracket are a single play; the numbers refer to the
toadstools: (1--5), (3--7, 7--1), (8--4, 4--3, 3--7), (6--2, 2--8, 8--4,
4--3), (5--6, 6--2, 2--8), (1--5, 5--6), (7--1).

This is the familiar old puzzle by Guarini, propounded in 1512, and I
give it here in order to explain my "buttons and string" method of
solving this class of moving-counter problem.

Diagram A shows the old way of presenting Guarini's puzzle, the point
being to make the white knights change places with the black ones. In
"The Four Frogs" presentation of the idea the possible directions of the
moves are indicated by lines, to obviate the necessity of the reader's
understanding the nature of the knight's move in chess. But it will at
once be seen that the two problems are identical. The central square
can, of course, be ignored, since no knight can ever enter it. Now,
regard the toadstools as buttons and the connecting lines as strings, as
in Diagram B. Then by disentangling these strings we can clearly present
the diagram in the form shown in Diagram C, where the relationship
between the buttons is precisely the same as in B. Any solution on C
will be applicable to B, and to A. Place your white knights on 1 and 3
and your black knights on 6 and 8 in the C diagram, and the simplicity
of the solution will be very evident. You have simply to move the
knights round the circle in one direction or the other. Play over the
moves given above, and you will find that every little difficulty has
disappeared.

[Illustrations: A B C D E]

In Diagram D I give another familiar puzzle that first appeared in a
book published in Brussels in 1789, _Les Petites Aventures de Jerome
Sharp_. Place seven counters on seven of the eight points in the
following manner. You must always touch a point that is vacant with a
counter, and then move it along a straight line leading from that point
to the next vacant point (in either direction), where you deposit the
counter. You proceed in the same way until all the counters are placed.
Remember you always touch a vacant place and slide the counter from it
to the next place, which must be also vacant. Now, by the "buttons and
string" method of simplification we can transform the diagram into E.
Then the solution becomes obvious. "Always move _to_ the point that you
last moved _from_." This is not, of course, the only way of placing the
counters, but it is the simplest solution to carry in the mind.

There are several puzzles in this book that the reader will find lend
themselves readily to this method.


342.--THE MANDARIN'S PUZZLE.

The rather perplexing point that the solver has to decide for himself in
attacking this puzzle is whether the shaded numbers (those that are
shown in their right places) are mere dummies or not. Ninety-nine
persons out of a hundred might form the opinion that there can be no
advantage in moving any of them, but if so they would be wrong.

The shortest solution without moving any shaded number is in thirty-two
moves. But the puzzle can be solved in thirty moves. The trick lies in
moving the 6, or the 15, on the second move and replacing it on the
nineteenth move. Here is the solution: 2, 6, 13, 4, 1, 21, 4, 1, 10, 2,
21, 10, 2, 5, 22, 16, 1, 13, 6, 19, 11, 2, 5, 22, 16, 5, 13, 4, 10, 21.
Thirty moves.


343.--EXERCISE FOR PRISONERS.

There are eighty different arrangements of the numbers in the form of a
perfect knight's path, but only forty of these can be reached without
two men ever being in a cell at the same time. Two is the greatest
number of men that can be given a complete rest, and though the knight's
path can be arranged so as to leave either 7 and 13, 8 and 13, 5 and 7,
or 5 and 13 in their original positions, the following four
arrangements, in which 7 and 13 are unmoved, are the only ones that can
be reached under the moving conditions. It therefore resolves itself
into finding the fewest possible moves that will lead up to one of these
positions. This is certainly no easy matter, and no rigid rules can be
laid down for arriving at the correct answer. It is largely a matter for
individual judgment, patient experiment, and a sharp eye for revolutions
and position.

          A
    +--+--+--+--+
    | 6| 1|10|15|
    +--+--+--+--+
    | 9|12| 7| 4|
    +--+--+--+--+
    | 2| 5|14|11|
    +--+--+--+--+
    |13| 8| 3|**|
    +--+--+--+--+

          B
    +--+--+--+--+
    | 6| 1|10|15|
    +--+--+--+--+
    |11|14| 7| 4|
    +--+--+--+--+
    | 2| 5|12| 9|
    +--+--+--+--+
    |13| 8| 3|**|
    +--+--+--+--+

          C
    +--+--+--+--+
    | 6| 9| 4|15|
    +--+--+--+--+
    | 1|12| 7|10|
    +--+--+--+--+
    | 8| 5|14| 3|
    +--+--+--+--+
    |13| 2|11|**|
    +--+--+--+--+

          D
    +--+--+--+--+
    | 6|11| 4|15|
    +--+--+--+--+
    | 1|14| 7|10|
    +--+--+--+--+
    | 8| 5|12| 3|
    +--+--+--+--+
    |13| 2| 9|**|
    +--+--+--+--+

[Illustration: A, B, C, D]

As a matter of fact, the position C can be reached in as few as
sixty-six moves in the following manner: 12, 11, 15, 12, 11, 8, 4, 3, 2,
6, 5, 1, 6, 5, 10, 15, 8, 4, 3, 2, 5, 10, 15, 8, 4, 3, 2, 5, 10, 15, 8,
4, 12, 11, 3, 2, 5, 10, 15, 6, 1, 8, 4, 9, 8, 1, 6, 4, 9, 12, 2, 5, 10,
15, 4, 9, 12, 2, 5, 3, 11, 14, 2, 5, 14, 11 = 66 moves. Though this is
the shortest that I know of, and I do not think it can be beaten, I
cannot state positively that there is not a shorter way yet to be
discovered. The most tempting arrangement is certainly A; but things
are not what they seem, and C is really the easiest to reach.

If the bottom left-hand corner cell might be left vacant, the following
is a solution in forty-five moves by Mr. R. Elrick: 15, 11, 10, 9, 13,
14, 11, 10, 7, 8, 4, 3, 8, 6, 9, 7, 12, 4, 6, 9, 5, 13, 7, 5, 13, 1, 2,
13, 5, 7, 1, 2, 13, 8, 3, 6, 9, 12, 7, 11, 14, 1, 11, 14, 1. But every
man has moved.


344.--THE KENNEL PUZZLE.

The first point is to make a choice of the most promising knight's
string and then consider the question of reaching the arrangement in the
fewest moves. I am strongly of opinion that the best string is the one
represented in the following diagram, in which it will be seen that each
successive number is a knight's move from the preceding one, and that
five of the dogs (1, 5, 10, 15, and 20) never leave their original
kennels.

    +-----+------+------+------+------+
    |1    |2     |3     |4     |5     |
    |     |      |      |      |      |
    |   1 |  18  |   9  |  14  |   5  |
    |     |      |      |      |      |
    +-----+------+------+------+------+
    |6    |7     |8     |9     |10    |
    |     |      |      |      |      |
    |   8 |  13  |   4  |  19  |  10  |
    |     |      |      |      |      |
    +-----+------+------+------+------+
    |11   |12    |13    |14    |15    |
    |     |      |      |      |      |
    |  17 |   2  |  11  |   6  |  15  |
    |     |      |      |      |      |
    +-----+------+------+------+------+
    |16   |17    |18    |19    |20    |
    |     |      |      |      |      |
    |  12 |   7  |  16  |   3  |  20  |
    |     |      |      |      |      |
    +-----+------+------+------+------+
    |21   |22    |23    |24    |25    |
    |     |      |      |      |      |
    |     |      |      |      |      |
    |     |      |      |      |      |
    +-----+------+------+------+------+

[Illustration]

This position may be arrived at in as few as forty-six moves, as
follows: 16--21, 16--22, 16--23, 17--16, 12--17, 12--22, 12--21,7--12,
7--17, 7--22, 11--12, 11--17, 2--7, 2--12, 6--11, 8--7, 8--6, 13--8,
18--13, 11--18, 2--17, 18--12, 18--7, 18--2, 13--7, 3--8, 3--13, 4--3,
4--8, 9--4, 9--3, 14--9, 14--4, 19--14, 19--9, 3--14, 3--19, 6--12,
6--13, 6--14, 17--11, 12--16, 2--12, 7--17, 11--13, 16--18 = 46 moves. I
am, of course, not able to say positively that a solution cannot be
discovered in fewer moves, but I believe it will be found a very hard
task to reduce the number.


345.--THE TWO PAWNS.

Call one pawn A and the other B. Now, owing to that optional first move,
either pawn may make either 5 or 6 moves in reaching the eighth square.
There are, therefore, four cases to be considered: (1) A 6 moves and B 6
moves; (2) A 6 moves and B 5 moves; (3) A 5 moves and B 6 moves; (4) A 5
moves and B 5 moves. In case (1) there are 12 moves, and we may select
any 6 of these for A. Therefore 7x8x9x10x11x12 divided by 1x2x3x4x5x6
gives us the number of variations for this case--that is, 924. Similarly
for case (2), 6 selections out of 11 will be 462; in case (3), 5
selections out of 11 will also be 462; and in case (4), 5 selections out
of 10 will be 252. Add these four numbers together and we get 2,100,
which is the correct number of different ways in which the pawns may
advance under the conditions. (See No. 270, on p. 204.)


346.--SETTING THE BOARD.

The White pawns may be arranged in 40,320 ways, the White rooks in 2
ways, the bishops in 2 ways, and the knights in 2 ways. Multiply these
numbers together, and we find that the White pieces may be placed in
322,560 different ways. The Black pieces may, of course, be placed in
the same number of ways. Therefore the men may be set up in 322,560 x
322,560 = 104,044,953,600 ways. But the point that nearly everybody
overlooks is that the board may be placed in two different ways for
every arrangement. Therefore the answer is doubled, and is
208,089,907,200 different ways.


347.--COUNTING THE RECTANGLES.

There are 1,296 different rectangles in all, 204 of which are squares,
counting the square board itself as one, and 1,092 rectangles that are
not squares. The general formula is that a board of n squared squares
contains ((n squared + n) squared)/4 rectangles, of which (2n cubed + 3n squared + n)/6 are
squares and (3n^4 + 2n cubed - 3n squared - 2n)/12 are rectangles that are not
squares. It is curious and interesting that the total number of
rectangles is always the square of the triangular number whose side is
n.


348.--THE ROOKERY.

The answer involves the little point that in the final position the
numbered rooks must be in numerical order in the direction contrary to
that in which they appear in the original diagram, otherwise it cannot
be solved. Play the rooks in the following order of their numbers. As
there is never more than one square to which a rook can move (except on
the final move), the notation is obvious--5, 6, 7, 5, 6, 4, 3, 6, 4, 7,
5, 4, 7, 3, 6, 7, 3, 5, 4, 3, 1, 8, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 1, 8, 2, 1, and rook
takes bishop, checkmate. These are the fewest possible
moves--thirty-two. The Black king's moves are all forced, and need not
be given.


349.--STALEMATE.


Working independently, the same position was arrived at by Messrs. S.
Loyd, E.N. Frankenstein, W.H. Thompson, and myself. So the following may
be accepted as the best solution possible to this curious problem :--

        White.       Black.
     1. P--Q4     1. P--K4
     2. Q--Q3     2. Q--R5
     3. Q--KKt3   3. B--Kt5 ch
     4. Kt--Q2    4. P--QR4
     5. P--R4     5. P--Q3
     6. P--R3     6. B--K3
     7. R--R3     7. P--KB4
     8. Q--R2     8. P--B4
     9. R--KKt3   9. B--Kt6
    10. P--QB4   10. P--B5
    11. P--B3    11. P--K5
    12. P--Q5    12. P--K6

And White is stalemated.

We give a diagram of the curious position arrived at. It will be seen
that not one of White's pieces may be moved.

[Illustration]

    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |r|n| | |k| |n|r|
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    | |p| | | | |p|p|
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    | | | |p| | | | |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |p| |p|P| | | | |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |P|b|P| | |p| |q|
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    | |b| | |p|P|R|P|
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    | |P| |N|P| |P|Q|
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    | | |B| |K|B|N|R|
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+


350.--THE FORSAKEN KING.

Play as follows:--

       White.            Black.
    1. P to K 4th     1. Any move
    2. Q to Kt 4th    2. Any move except on KB file (a)
    3. Q to Kt 7th    3. K moves to royal row
    4. B to Kt 5th    4. Any move
    5. Mate in two moves
                   If 3. K other than to royal row
    4. P to Q 4th     4. Any move
    5. Mate in two moves
               (a) If 2. Any move on KB file
    3. Q to Q 7th     3. K moves to royal row
    4. P to Q Kt 3rd  4. Any move
    5. Mate in two moves
                   If 3. K other than to royal row
    4. P to Q 4th     4. Any move
    5. Mate in two moves

Of course, by "royal row" is meant the row on which the king originally
stands at the beginning of a game. Though, if Black plays badly, he may,
in certain positions, be mated in fewer moves, the above provides for
every variation he can possibly bring about.


351.--THE CRUSADER.

        White.                    Black.
     1. Kt to QB 3rd           1. P to Q 4th
     2. Kt takes QP            2. Kt to QB 3rd
     3. Kt takes KP            3. P to KKt 4th
     4. Kt takes B             4. Kt to KB 3rd
     5. Kt takes P             5. Kt to K 5th
     6. Kt takes Kt            6. Kt to B 6th
     7. Kt takes Q             7. R to KKt sq
     8. Kt takes BP            8. R to KKt 3rd
     9. Kt takes P             9. R to K 3rd
    10. Kt takes P            10. Kt to Kt 8th
    11. Kt takes B            11. R to R 6th
    12. Kt takes R            12. P to Kt 4th
    13. Kt takes P (ch)       13. K to B 2nd
    14. Kt takes P            14. K to Kt 3rd
    15. Kt takes R            15. K to R 4th
    16. Kt takes Kt           16. K to R 5th
        White now mates in three moves.
    17. P to Q 4th            17. K to R 4th
    18. Q to Q 3rd            18. K moves
    19. Q to KR 3rd (mate)
                           If 17. K to Kt 5th
    18. P to K 4th (dis. ch)  18. K moves
    19. P to KKt 3rd (mate)

The position after the sixteenth move, with the mate in three moves, was
first given by S. Loyd in _Chess Nuts_.


352.--IMMOVABLE PAWNS.

     1. Kt to KB 3
     2. Kt to KR 4
     3. Kt to Kt 6
     4. Kt takes R
     5. Kt to Kt 6
     6. Kt takes B
     7. K takes Kt
     8. Kt to QB 3
     9. Kt to R 4
    10. Kt to Kt 6
    11. Kt takes R
    12. Kt to Kt 6
    13. Kt takes B
    14. Kt to Q 6
    15. Q to K sq
    16. Kt takes Q
    17. K takes Kt, and the position is reached.

Black plays precisely the same moves as White, and therefore we give one
set of moves only. The above seventeen moves are the fewest possible.


353.--THIRTY-SIX MATES.

Place the remaining eight White pieces thus: K at KB 4th, Q at QKt 6th,
R at Q 6th, R at KKt 7th, B at Q 5th, B at KR 8th, Kt at QR 5th, and Kt
at QB 5th. The following mates can then be given:--

    By discovery from Q            8
    By discovery from R at Q 6th  13
    By discovery from B at R 8th  11
    Given by Kt at R 5th           2
    Given by pawns                 2
                                  --
       Total                      36

Is it possible to construct a position in which more than thirty-six
different mates on the move can be given? So far as I know, nobody has
yet beaten my arrangement.


354.--AN AMAZING DILEMMA.

Mr Black left his king on his queen's knight's 7th, and no matter what
piece White chooses for his pawn, Black cannot be checkmated. As we
said, the Black king takes no notice of checks and never moves. White
may queen his pawn, capture the Black rook, and bring his three pieces
up to the attack, but mate is quite impossible. The Black king cannot be
left on any other square without a checkmate being possible.

The late Sam Loyd first pointed out the peculiarity on which this puzzle
is based.


355.--CHECKMATE!

Remove the White pawn from B 6th to K 4th and place a Black pawn on
Black's KB 2nd. Now, White plays P to K 5th, check, and Black must play
P to B 4th. Then White plays P takes P _en passant_, checkmate. This was
therefore White's last move, and leaves the position given. It is the
only possible solution.


356.--QUEER CHESS.

    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    | | | | | | | | |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    | | |R|k|R|N| | |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    | | | | | | | | |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

If you place the pieces as follows (where only a portion of the board is
given, to save space), the Black king is in check, with no possible move
open to him. The reader will now see why I avoided the term "checkmate,"
apart from the fact that there is no White king. The position is
impossible in the game of chess, because Black could not be given check
by both rooks at the same time, nor could he have moved into check on
his last move.

I believe the position was first published by the late S. Loyd.


357.--ANCIENT CHINESE PUZZLE.

Play as follows:--

    1. R--Q 6
    2. K--R 7
    3. R (R 6)--B 6 (mate).

Black's moves are forced, so need not be given.


358.--THE SIX PAWNS.

The general formula for six pawns on all squares greater than 2 squared is
this: Six times the square of the number of combinations of n things
taken three at a time, where n represents the number of squares on the
side of the board. Of course, where n is even the unoccupied squares
in the rows and columns will be even, and where n is odd the number of
squares will be odd. Here n is 8, so the answer is 18,816 different
ways. This is "The Dyer's Puzzle" (_Canterbury Puzzles_, No. 27) in
another form. I repeat it here in order to explain a method of solving
that will be readily grasped by the novice. First of all, it is evident
that if we put a pawn on any line, we must put a second one in that line
in order that the remainder may be even in number. We cannot put four or
six in any row without making it impossible to get an even number in all
the columns interfered with. We have, therefore, to put two pawns in
each of three rows and in each of three columns. Now, there are just six
schemes or arrangements that fulfil these conditions, and these are
shown in Diagrams A to F, inclusive, on next page.

[Illustration]

I will just remark in passing that A and B are the only distinctive
arrangements, because, if you give A a quarter-turn, you get F; and if
you give B three quarter-turns in the direction that a clock hand
moves, you will get successively C, D, and E. No matter how you may
place your six pawns, if you have complied with the conditions of the
puzzle they will fall under one of these arrangements. Of course it
will be understood that mere expansions do not destroy the essential
character of the arrangements. Thus G is only an expansion of form A.
The solution therefore consists in finding the number of these
expansions. Supposing we confine our operations to the first three
rows, as in G, then with the pairs a and b placed in the first and
second columns the pair c may be disposed in any one of the remaining
six columns, and so give six solutions. Now slide pair b into the
third column, and there are five possible positions for c. Slide b
into the fourth column, and c may produce four new solutions. And so
on, until (still leaving a in the first column) you have b in the
seventh column, and there is only one place for c--in the eighth
column. Then you may put a in the second column, b in the third, and c
in the fourth, and start sliding c and b as before for another series
of solutions.

We find thus that, by using form A alone and confining our operations to
the three top rows, we get as many answers as there are combinations of
8 things taken 3 at a time. This is (8 x 7 x 6)/(1 x 2 x 3) = 56. And it
will at once strike the reader that if there are 56 different ways of
electing the columns, there must be for each of these ways just 56 ways
of selecting the rows, for we may simultaneously work that "sliding"
process downwards to the very bottom in exactly the same way as we have
worked from left to right. Therefore the total number of ways in which
form A may be applied is 56 x 6 = 3,136. But there are, as we have seen,
six arrangements, and we have only dealt with one of these, A. We must,
therefore, multiply this result by 6, which gives us 3,136 x 6 = 18,816,
which is the total number of ways, as we have already stated.


359.--COUNTER SOLITAIRE.

Play as follows: 3--11, 9--10, 1--2, 7--15, 8--16, 8--7, 5--13, 1--4,
8--5, 6--14, 3--8, 6--3, 6--12, 1--6, 1--9, and all the counters will
have been removed, with the exception of No. 1, as required by the
conditions.


360.--CHESSBOARD SOLITAIRE.

Play as follows: 7--15, 8--16, 8--7, 2--10, 1--9, 1--2, 5--13, 3--4,
6--3, 11--1, 14--8, 6--12, 5--6, 5--11, 31--23, 32--24, 32--31, 26--18,
25--17, 25--26, 22--32, 14--22, 29--21, 14--29, 27--28, 30--27, 25--14,
30--20, 25--30, 25--5. The two counters left on the board are 25 and
19--both belonging to the same group, as stipulated--and 19 has never
been moved from its original place.

I do not think any solution is possible in which only one counter is
left on the board.


361.--THE MONSTROSITY.

        White          Black,
     1. P to KB 4      P to QB 3
     2. K to B 2       Q to R 4
     3. K to K 3       K to Q sq
     4. P to B 5       K to B 2
     5. Q to K sq      K to Kt 3
     6. Q to Kt 3      Kt to QR 3
     7. Q to Kt 8      P to KR 4
     8. Kt to KB 3     R to R 3
     9. Kt to K 5      R to Kt 3
    10. Q takes B      R to Kt 6, ch
    11. P takes R      K to Kt 4
    12. R to R 4       P to B 3
    13. R to Q 4       P takes Kt
    14. P to QKt 4     P takes R, ch
    15. K to B 4       P to R 5
    16. Q to K 8       P to R 6
    17. Kt to B 3, ch  P takes Kt
    18. B to R 3       P to R 7
    19. R to Kt sq     P to R 8 (Q)
    20. R to Kt 2      P takes R
    21. K to Kt 5      Q to KKt 8
    22. Q to R 5       K to R 5
    23. P to Kt 5      R to B sq
    24. P to Kt 6      R to B 2
    25. P takes R      P to Kt 8 (B)
    26. P to B 8 (R)   Q to B 2
    27. B to Q 6       Kt to Kt 5
    28. K to Kt 6      K to R 6
    29. R to R 8       K to Kt 7
    30. P to R 4       Q (Kt 8) to Kt 3
    31. P to R 5       K to B 8
    32. P takes Q      K to Q 8
    33. P takes Q      K to K 8
    34. K to B 7       Kt to KR 3, ch
    35. K to K 8       B to R 7
    36. P to B 6       B to Kt sq
    37. P to B 7       K takes B
    38. P to B 8 (B)   Kt to Q 4
    39. B to Kt 8      Kt to B 3, ch
    40. K to Q 8       Kt to K sq
    41. P takes Kt (R) Kt to B 2, ch
    42. K to B 7       Kt to Q sq
    43. Q to B 7, ch   K to Kt 8

And the position is reached.

The order of the moves is immaterial, and this order may be greatly
varied. But, although many attempts have been made, nobody has succeeded
in reducing the number of my moves.


362.--THE WASSAIL BOWL.

The division of the twelve pints of ale can be made in eleven
manipulations, as below. The six columns show at a glance the quantity
of ale in the barrel, the five-pint jug, the three-pint jug, and the
tramps X, Y, and Z respectively after each manipulation.

        Barrel. 5-pint. 3-pint.    X.       Y.       Z.

        7   ..   5   ..   0   ..   0   ..   0   ..   0
        7   ..   2   ..   3   ..   0   ..   0   ..   0
        7   ..   0   ..   3   ..   2   ..   0   ..   0
        7   ..   3   ..   0   ..   2   ..   0   ..   0
        4   ..   3   ..   3   ..   2   ..   0   ..   0
        0   ..   3   ..   3   ..   2   ..   4   ..   0
        0   ..   5   ..   1   ..   2   ..   4   ..   0
        0   ..   5   ..   0   ..   2   ..   4   ..   1
        0   ..   2   ..   3   ..   2   ..   4   ..   1
        0   ..   0   ..   3   ..   4   ..   4   ..   1
        0   ..   0   ..   0   ..   4   ..   4   ..   4

And each man has received his four pints of ale.


363.--THE DOCTOR'S QUERY.

The mixture of spirits of wine and water is in the proportion of 40 to
1, just as in the other bottle it was in the proportion of 1 to 40.



364.--THE BARREL PUZZLE.

[Illustration: Figs. 1, 2, and 3]

All that is necessary is to tilt the barrel as in Fig. 1, and if the
edge of the surface of the water exactly touches the lip a at the same
time that it touches the edge of the bottom b, it will be just half
full. To be more exact, if the bottom is an inch or so from the ground,
then we can allow for that, and the thickness of the bottom, at the top.
If when the surface of the water reached the lip a it had risen to the
point c in Fig. 2, then it would be more than half full. If, as in
Fig. 3, some portion of the bottom were visible and the level of the
water fell to the point d, then it would be less than half full.

This method applies to all symmetrically constructed vessels.



365.--NEW MEASURING PUZZLE.

The following solution in eleven manipulations shows the contents of
every vessel at the start and after every manipulation:--

    10-quart. 10-quart. 5-quart.  4-quart.

       10   ..   10   ..   0   ..   0
        5   ..   10   ..   5   ..   0
        5   ..   10   ..   1   ..   4
        9   ..   10   ..   1   ..   0
        9   ..    6   ..   1   ..   4
        9   ..    7   ..   0   ..   4
        9   ..    7   ..   4   ..   0
        9   ..    3   ..   4   ..   4
        9   ..    3   ..   5   ..   3
        9   ..    8   ..   0   ..   3
        4   ..    8   ..   5   ..   3
        4   ..   10   ..   3   ..   3



366.--THE HONEST DAIRYMAN.

Whatever the respective quantities of milk and water, the relative
proportion sent to London would always be three parts of water to one of
milk. But there are one or two points to be observed. There must
originally be more water than milk, or there will be no water in A to
double in the second transaction. And the water must not be more than
three times the quantity of milk, or there will not be enough liquid in
B to effect the second transaction. The third transaction has no effect
on A, as the relative proportions in it must be the same as after the
second transaction. It was introduced to prevent a quibble if the
quantity of milk and water were originally the same; for though double
"nothing" would be "nothing," yet the third transaction in such a case
could not take place.



367.--WINE AND WATER.

The wine in small glass was one-sixth of the total liquid, and the wine
in large glass two-ninths of total. Add these together, and we find that
the wine was seven-eighteenths of total fluid, and therefore the water
eleven-eighteenths.



368.--THE KEG OF WINE.

The capacity of the jug must have been a little less than three gallons.
To be more exact, it was 2.93 gallons.



369.--MIXING THE TEA.

There are three ways of mixing the teas. Taking them in the order of
quality, 2s. 6d., 2s. 3d., 1s. 9p., mix 16 lbs., 1 lb., 3 lbs.; or 14
lbs., 4 lbs., 2 lbs.; or 12 lbs., 7 lbs., 1 lb. In every case the
twenty pounds mixture should be worth 2s. 41/2d. per pound; but the last
case requires the smallest quantity of the best tea, therefore it is
the correct answer.


370.--A PACKING PUZZLE.

On the side of the box, 14 by 22+4/5, we can arrange 13 rows containing
alternately 7 and 6 balls, or 85 in all. Above this we can place another
layer consisting of 12 rows of 7 and 6 alternately, or a total of 78. In
the length of 24+9/10 inches 15 such layers may be packed, the alternate
layers containing 85 and 78 balls. Thus 8 times 85 added to 7 times 78
gives us 1,226 for the full contents of the box.


371.--GOLD PACKING IN RUSSIA.

The box should be 100 inches by 100 inches by 11 inches deep, internal
dimensions. We can lay flat at the bottom a row of eight slabs,
lengthways, end to end, which will just fill one side, and nine of these
rows will dispose of seventy-two slabs (all on the bottom), with a space
left over on the bottom measuring 100 inches by 1 inch by 1 inch. Now
make eleven depths of such seventy-two slabs, and we have packed 792,
and have a space 100 inches by 1 inch by 11 inches deep. In this we may
exactly pack the remaining eight slabs on edge, end to end.


372.--THE BARRELS OF HONEY.

The only way in which the barrels could be equally divided among the
three brothers, so that each should receive his 31/2 barrels of honey
and his 7 barrels, is as follows:--

      Full.  Half-full. Empty.
    A   3        1        3
    B   2        3        2
    C   2        3        2

There is one other way in which the division could be made, were it not
for the objection that all the brothers made to taking more than four
barrels of the same description. Except for this difficulty, they might
have given B his quantity in exactly the same way as A above, and then
have left C one full barrel, five half-full barrels, and one empty
barrel. It will thus be seen that in any case two brothers would have to
receive their allowance in the same way.
