You are to know, said he, that several committees of council have been	 	
lately called in the most private manner on your account; and it is but	  
two days since his majesty came to a full resolution.	 	
			
You are very sensible that Skyrris Bolgolam (_galbet_ or high-admiral)			
hath been your mortal enemy almost ever since your arrival: his original	  
reasons I know not; but his hatred is increased since your great success 		
against Blefuscu, by which his glory, as admiral, is much obscured. This		 
lord, in conjunction with Flimnap the high treasurer, whose enmity	  
against you is notorious, Limtoc the general, Lalcon the chamberlain,		 
and Balmuff the grand justiciary, have prepared articles of impeachment 		
against you, for treason, and other capital crimes.	  
			
This preface made me so impatient, being conscious of my own merits and 		
innocence, that I was going to interrupt; when he entreated me to be			
silent, and thus proceeded.			
 	 
[Illustration: "HE DESIRED I WOULD HEAR HIM WITH PATIENCE." P. 80.]	  
  	
Out of gratitude for the favors you have done for me, I procured 		
information of the whole proceedings, and a copy of the articles;  	
wherein I venture my head for your service. 	 
 		
ARTICLES OF IMPEACHMENT AGAINST QUINBUS FLESTRIN, THE MAN-MOUNTAIN. 	 
	  
ARTICLE I.		 
	 	
     Whereas, by a statute made in the reign of his Imperial Majesty   
     Calin Deffar Plune, it is enacted, That whoever shall lay hands	 	
     upon the empress, or upon any of the royal children, shall be			
     liable to the pains and penalties of high treason. Notwithstanding, 		
     the said Quinbus Flestrin, in open breach of the said law, under			
     color of extinguishing the fire kindled in the apartment of his	  
     Majesty's most dear imperial consort, did maliciously, and			
     traitorously, pull her by the arms, and lift her high in the air in	 	
     both his hands, against the statute in that case provided, &c.,   
     against the duty, &c.	 	
			
     ARTICLE II. 		
			
     That the said Quinbus Flestrin, having brought the imperial fleet		 
     of Blefuscu into the royal port, and being afterwards commanded by 		
     his imperial majesty to seize all the other ships of the said 		
     empire of Blefuscu, and reduce that empire to a province, to be	  
     governed by a viceroy from hence, and to destroy and put to death,		 
     not only all the Big-endian exiles, but likewise all the people of			
     that empire who would not immediately forsake the Big-endian   
     heresy. He, the said Flestrin, like a false traitor against his	 	
     most auspicious, serene, imperial majesty, did petition to be		 
     excused from the said service, upon pretence of unwillingness to 		
     force the consciences or destroy the liberties and lives of an			
     innocent people.	  
			
     ARTICLE III.			
 		
     That, whereas certain ambassadors arrived from the court of			
     Blefuscu, to sue for peace in his majesty's court; he, the said	  
     Flestrin, did, like a false traitor, aid, abet, comfort, and divert 	 
     the said ambassadors, although he knew them to be servants to a			
     prince who was lately an open enemy to his imperial majesty, and in  	
     open war against his said majesty.   
 	 
     ARTICLE IV. 	 
 	 
     That the said Quinbus Flestrin, contrary to the duty of a faithful	  
     subject, is now preparing to make a voyage to the court and empire	  
     of Blefuscu, for which he hath received only verbal license from  	
     his imperial majesty; and under color of the said license, doth   
     falsely and traitorously intend to take the said voyage, and		 
     thereby to aid, comfort, and abet the emperor of Blefuscu, so late		 
     an enemy, and in open war with his imperial majesty aforesaid.  	
	 	
There are some other articles, but these are the most important, of	  
which I have read you an abstract.	  
  	
In the several debates upon this impeachment, it must be confessed that   
his majesty gave many marks of his great lenity, often urging the	  
services you had done him, and endeavoring to extenuate your crimes. The 		
treasurer and admiral insisted that you should be put to the most 		
painful and ignominious death, by setting fire on your house at night;			
and the general was to attend, with twenty thousand men armed with	  
poisoned arrows, to shoot you on the face and hands. Some of your			
servants were to have private orders to strew a poisonous juice on your	 	
shirts and sheets, which would soon make you tear your own flesh, and   
die in the utmost torture. The general came into the same opinion; so	 	
that for a long time there was a majority against you: but his majesty			
resolving, if possible, to spare your life, at last brought off the 		
chamberlain.			
	  
Upon this incident, Reldresal, principal secretary for private affairs,	  
who always approved himself your true friend, was commanded by the  	
emperor to deliver his opinion, which he accordingly did; and therein   
justified the good thoughts you have of him. He allowed your crimes to	 	
be great, but that still there was room for mercy, the most commendable 	 
virtue in a prince, and for which his majesty was so justly celebrated.  	
He said, the friendship between you and him was so well known to the	 	
world, that perhaps the most honorable board might think him partial;		 
however, in obedience to the command he had received, he would freely			
offer his sentiments; that if his majesty, in consideration of your			
services, and pursuant to his own merciful disposition, would please to   
spare your life, and only give orders to put out both your eyes, he		 
humbly conceived that, by this expedient, justice might in some measure 	 
be satisfied, and all the world would applaud the lenity of the emperor, 		
as well as the fair and generous proceedings of those who have the honor 	 
to be his counsellors: that the loss of your eyes would be no impediment	  
to your bodily strength, by which you might still be useful to his			
majesty: that blindness is an addition to courage, by concealing dangers  	
from us: that the fear you had for your eyes was the greatest difficulty   
in bringing over the enemy's fleet: and it would be sufficient for you	 	
to see by the eyes of the ministers, since the greatest princes do no 	 
more.  	
	 	
[Illustration]	  
		 
This proposal was received with the utmost disapprobation by the whole	 	
board. Bolgolam, the admiral, could not preserve his temper, but rising	 	
up in fury, said he wondered how the secretary durst presume to give his			
opinion for preserving the life of a traitor: that the services you had		 
performed were, by all true reasons of state, the great aggravation of 	 
your crimes: that you, who extinguished the fire in that unprincipled 		
manner, might at another time inundate and drown the whole palace; and	  
the same strength, which enabled you to bring over the enemy's fleet,	  
might serve, upon the first discontent, to carry it back: that he had  	
good reasons to think you were a Big-endian in your heart; and, as  	
treason begins in the heart, before it appears in overt acts, so he		 
accused you as a traitor on that account, and therefore insisted you 	 
should be put to death. 		
		 
The treasurer was of the same opinion. He showed to what straits his	  
majesty's revenue was reduced, by the charge of maintaining you, which 	 
would soon grow insupportable. That the secretary's expedient of putting			
out your eyes was so far from being a remedy against this evil, that it  	
would probably increase it, as is manifest from the common practice of 		
blinding some sort of fowls, after which they fed the faster, and grew 	 
sooner fat. That his sacred majesty, and the council, who are your 	 
judges, were to their own consciences fully convinced of your guilt,   
which was a sufficient argument to condemn you to death without the	  
formal proofs required by the strict letter of the law.	  
 		
But his imperial majesty, fully determined against capital punishment,	 	
was graciously pleaded to say, that since the council thought the loss   
of your eyes too easy a censure, some other might be inflicted			
hereafter. And your friend, the secretary, humbly desiring to be heard 		
again, in answer to what the treasurer had objected concerning the great			
charge his majesty was at in maintaining you, said that his excellency,		 
who had the sole disposal of the emperor's revenue, might easily provide			
against that evil, by gradually lessening your establishment; by which,			
for want of sufficient food, you would grow weak and faint, and lose 		
your appetite, and consume in a few months; neither would the stench of		 
your carcase be then so dangerous when it should become more than half 	 
diminished; and, immediately upon your death, five or six thousand of 	 
his majesty's subjects might in two or three days cut your flesh from   
your bones, take it away by cart-loads, and bury it in distant parts, to	  
prevent infection, leaving the skeleton as a monument of admiration to	  
posterity.	 	
  	
Thus, by the great friendship of the secretary, the whole affair was	 	
compromised. It was strictly enjoined that the project of starving you 		
by degrees should be kept a secret, but the sentence of putting out your 		
eyes was entered on the books, none dissenting except Bolgolam, the			
admiral, who, being a creature of the empress, was perpetually	  
instigated by her majesty to insist upon your death, she having borne			
perpetual malice against you, on account of that illegal method you took	 	
to remove her and her children the night of the fire.  	
  	
In three days, your friend the secretary will be directed to come to		 
your house and read before you the articles of impeachment; and then to 	 
signify the great lenity and favor of his majesty and council, whereby   
you are only condemned to the loss of your eyes, which his majesty doth	  
not question you will gratefully and humbly submit to; and twenty of his	  
majesty's surgeons will attend, in order to see the operation well 		
performed, by discharging very sharp-pointed arrows into the balls of  	
your eyes as you lie on the ground.	 	
 		
I leave to your prudence what measures you will take; and, to avoid 	 
suspicion, I must immediately return, in as private a manner as I came. 		
		 
His lordship did so, and I remained alone, under many doubts and			
perplexities of mind.			
  	
It was a custom, introduced by this prince and his ministry (very			
different, as I have been assured, from the practices of former times), 	 
that after the court had decreed any cruel execution either to gratify 	 
the monarch's resentment or the malice of a favorite, the emperor always  	
made a speech to his whole council, expressing his great lenity and	  
tenderness, as qualities known and confessed by all the world. This		 
speech was immediately published through the kingdom; nor did anything			
terrify the people so much as those encomiums on his majesty's mercy;	 	
because it was observed that, the more these praises were enlarged and			
insisted on, the more inhuman was the punishment, and the sufferer more		 
innocent. Yet, as to myself, I must confess, having never been designed 		
for a courtier, either by my birth or education, I was so ill a judge of 		
things that I could not discover the lenity and favor of this sentence,	  
but conceived it (perhaps erroneously) rather to be rigorous than	  
gentle, I sometimes thought of standing my trial; for although I could  	
not deny the facts alleged in the several articles, yet I hoped they	 	
would admit of some extenuation. But having in my life perused many			
state-trials, which I ever observed to terminate as the judges thought		 
fit to direct, I durst not rely on so dangerous a decision, in so 	 
critical a juncture, and against such powerful enemies. Once I was  	
strongly bent upon resistance, for, while I had liberty, the whole	  
strength of that empire could hardly subdue me, and I might easily with	  
stones pelt the metropolis to pieces; but I soon rejected that project  	
with horror, by remembering the oath I had made to the emperor, the   
favors I received from him, and the high title of _nardac_ he conferred	 	
upon me. Neither had I so soon learned the gratitude of courtiers as to			
persuade myself that his majesty's present seventies acquitted me of all 		
past obligations.			
	  
At last I fixed upon a resolution, for which it is probable I may incur 	 
some censure, and not unjustly; for I confess I owe the preserving mine			
eyes, and consequently my liberty, to my own great rashness and want of  	
experience; because if I had then known the nature of princes and	 	
ministers, which I have since observed in many other courts, and their 	 
methods of treating criminals less obnoxious than myself, I should with 	 
great alacrity and readiness have submitted to so easy a punishment. 		
But, hurried on by the precipitancy of youth, and having his imperial	  
majesty's license to pay my attendance upon the emperor of Blefuscu, I	  
took this opportunity, before the three days were elapsed, to send a			
letter to my friend the secretary, signifying my resolution of setting	 	
out that morning for Blefuscu pursuant to the leave I had got; and,			
without waiting for an answer, I went to that side of the island where		 
our fleet lay. I seized a large man-of-war, tied a cable to the prow, 		
and lifting up the anchors, I stript myself, put my clothes (together		 
with my coverlet, which I carried under my arm) into the vessel, and	  
drawing it after me, between wading and swimming arrived at the royal	  
port of Blefuscu, where the people had long expected me; they lent me 		
two guides to direct me to the capital city, which is of the same name.   
I held them in my hands until I came within two hundred yards of the 		
gate, and desired them to signify my arrival to one of the secretaries, 	 
and let him know I there waited his majesty's command. I had an answer 	 
in about an hour, that his majesty, attended by the royal family and   
great officers of the court, was coming out to receive me. I advanced a	  
hundred yards. The emperor and his train alighted from their horses, the	  
empress and ladies from their coaches, and I did not perceive they were 		
in any fright or concern. I lay on the ground to kiss his majesty's and  	
the empress's hand.	 	
 		
[Illustration] 		
			
I told his majesty that I was come, according to my promise, and with		 
the license of the emperor, my master, to have the honor of seeing so	  
mighty a monarch, and to offer him any service in my power consistent	 	
with my duty to my own prince, not mentioning a word of my disgrace,	 	
because I had hitherto no regular information of it, and might suppose			
myself wholly ignorant of any such design; neither could I reasonably		 
conceive that the emperor would discover the secret while I was out of  	
his power, wherein however it soon appeared I was deceived. 		
	  
I shall not trouble the reader with the particular account of my	 	
reception at this court, which was suitable to the generosity of so			
great a prince; nor of the difficulties I was in for want of a house and  	
bed, being forced to lie on the ground, wrapped up in my coverlet. 		
 	 
[Illustration]  	
	  
		 
			
			
CHAPTER VIII.  	
  	
     THE AUTHOR, BY A LUCKY ACCIDENT, FINDS MEANS TO LEAVE BLEFUSCU, AND 	 
     AFTER SOME DIFFICULTIES, RETURNS SAFE TO HIS NATIVE COUNTRY. 		
 	 
	  
Three days after my arrival, walking out of curiosity to the northeast		 
coast of the island, I observed, about half a league off in the sea,	 	
somewhat that looked like a boat overturned. I pulled off my shoes and   
stockings, and wading two or three hundred yards, I found the object to	 	
approach nearer by force of the tide; and then plainly saw it to be a		 
real boat, which I supposed might by some tempest have been driven from 	 
a ship: whereupon I returned immediately towards the city, and desired		 
his imperial majesty to lend me twenty of the tallest vessels he had	  
left after the loss of his fleet, and three thousand seamen under the	  
command of his vice-admiral. This fleet sailed round, while I went back 		
the shortest way to the coast, where I first discovered the boat. I  	
found the tide had driven it still nearer. The seamen were all provided	  
with cordage, which I had beforehand twisted to a sufficient strength. 		
When the ships came up, I stripped myself, and waded till I came within 		
a hundred yards of the boat, after which I was forced to swim till I got			
up to it. The seamen threw me the end of the cord, which I fastened to a	  
hole in the forepart of the boat, and the other end to a man-of-war. But	 	
I found all my labor to little purpose; for, being out of my depth, I	 	
was not able to work. In this necessity, I was forced to swim behind,   
and push the boat forwards as often as I could with one of my hands,		 
and, the tide favoring me, I advanced so far, that I could just hold up 		
my chin and feel the ground. I rested two or three minutes, and then 		
gave the boat another shove, and so on till the sea was no higher than			
my arm-pits; and now, the most laborious part being over, I took out my	  
other cables, which were stowed in one of the ships, and fastened them 		
first to the boat, and then to nine of the vessels which attended me;  	
the wind being favorable, the seamen towed, and I shoved, till we  	
arrived within forty yards of the shore, and waiting till the tide was	 	
out, I got dry to the boat, and, by the assistance of two thousand men, 	 
with ropes and engines, I made a shift to turn it on its bottom, and 	 
found it was but little damaged.  	
	  
I shall not trouble the reader with the difficulties I was under, by the 		
help of certain paddles, which cost me ten days making, to get my boat  	
to the royal port of Blefuscu, where a mighty concourse of people  	
appeared upon my arrival, full of wonder at the sight of so prodigious a 		
vessel. I told the emperor that my good fortune had thrown this boat in 	 
my way, to carry me to some place from whence I might return into my  	
native country, and begged his majesty's orders for getting materials to 		
fit it up, together with his license to depart, which, after some kind	  
expostulation, he was pleased to grant.	 	
	 	
I did very much wonder, in all this time, not to have heard of any   
express relating to me from our emperor to the court of Blefuscu. But I	  
was afterwards given privately to understand that his imperial majesty,		 
never imagining I had the least notice of his designs, believed I was 		
only gone to Blefuscu in performance of my promise according to the 	 
license he had given me, which was well known at our court, and would		 
return in a few days when the ceremony was ended. But he was at last in	  
pain at my long absence; and, after consulting with the treasurer and			
the rest of that cabal,[35] a person of quality was despatched with the	 	
copy of the articles against me. This envoy had instructions to			
represent to the monarch of Blefuscu the great lenity of his master, who		 
was content to punish me no farther than the loss of mine eyes; that I 		
had fled from justice, and, if I did not return in two hours, I should		 
be deprived of my title of _nardac_ and declared a traitor. The envoy	  
farther added that, in order to maintain the peace and amity between 		
both empires, his master expected that his brother of Blefuscu would  	
give orders to have me sent back to Lilliput, bound hand and foot, to be	 	
punished as a traitor.			
		 
The emperor of Blefuscu, having taken three days to consult, returned an 	 
answer consisting of many civilities and excuses. He said that, as for 		
sending me bound, his brother knew it was impossible. That, although I	  
had deprived him of his fleet, yet he owed great obligations to me for		 
many good offices I had done him in making the peace. That, however,	 	
both their majesties would soon be made easy; for I had found a  	
prodigious vessel on the shore, able to carry me on the sea, which he			
had given orders to fit up with my own assistance and direction; and he 	 
hoped in a few weeks both empires would be freed from so insupportable 		
an incumbrance. 		
	  
With this answer the envoy returned to Lilliput, and the monarch of		 
Blefuscu related to me all that had passed; offering me at the same time	 	
(but under the strictest confidence) his gracious protection if I would   
continue in his service; wherein, although I believed him sincere, yet I		 
resolved never more to put any confidence in princes or ministers where		 
I could possibly avoid it; and, therefore, with all due acknowledgments  	
for his favorable intentions, I humbly begged to be excused. I told him	  
that, since fortune, whether good or evil, had thrown a vessel in my	  
way, I was resolved to venture myself in the ocean, rather than be an	 	
occasion of difference between two such mighty monarchs. Neither did I			
find the emperor at all displeased; and I discovered, by a certain  	
accident, that he was very glad of my resolution, and so were most of 		
his ministers. 	 
  	
These considerations moved me to hasten my departure somewhat sooner			
than I intended; to which the court, impatient to have me gone, very		 
readily contributed. Five hundred workmen were employed to make two			
sails to my boat, according to my directions, by quilting thirteen folds			
of their strongest linen together. I was at the pains of making ropes   
and cables, by twisting ten, twenty, or thirty of the thickest and	  
strongest of theirs. A great stone, that I happened to find after a long 	 
search by the sea-shore, served me for an anchor. I had the tallow of 	 
three hundred cows for greasing my boat, and other uses. I was at		 
incredible pains in cutting down some of the largest timber-trees for	  
oars and masts, wherein I was, however, much assisted by his majesty's	  
ship-carpenters, who helped me in smoothing them after I had done the			
rough work.  	
  	
In about a month, when all was prepared, I sent to receive his majesty's			
commands, and to take my leave. The emperor and royal family came out of 		
the palace. I lay down on my face to kiss his hand, which he very			
graciously gave me; so did the empress and young princes of the blood.	  
His majesty presented me with fifty purses of two hundred _sprugs_			
a-piece, together with his picture at full length, which I put 		
immediately into one of my gloves, to keep it from being hurt. The  	
ceremonies at my departure were too many to trouble the reader with at	 	
this time. 		
 		
[Illustration: "I SET SAIL AT SIX IN THE MORNING" P. 98.]			
	  
I stored the boat with the carcases of a hundred oxen, and three hundred 		
sheep, with bread and drink proportionable, and as much meat ready			
dressed as four hundred cooks could provide. I took with me six cows and   
two bulls alive, with as many ewes and lambs, intending to carry them		 
into my own country, and propagate the breed. And to feed them on board,		 
I had a good bundle of hay and a bag of corn. I would gladly have 		
taken a dozen of the natives, but this was a thing the emperor would by 	 
no means permit; and, besides a diligent search into my pockets, his	  
majesty engaged my honor not to carry away any of his subjects, although 		
with their own consent and desire.  	
  	
Having thus prepared all things as well as I was able, I set sail on the	 	
twenty-fourth day of September, 1701, at six in the morning; and, when I 	 
had gone about four leagues to the northward, the wind being at 	 
southeast, at six in the evening I descried a small island about half a  	
league to the northwest I advanced forward, and cast anchor on the lee	  
side[36] of the island, which seemed to be uninhabited. I then took some 	 
refreshment, and went to my rest. I slept well, and, as I conjecture, at			
least six hours, for I found the day broke two hours after I awaked. It	 	
was a clear night. I ate my breakfast before the sun was up; and heaving   
anchor, the wind being favorable, I steered the same course that I had			
done the day before, wherein I was directed by my pocket-compass. My 		
intention was to reach, if possible, one of those islands, which, I had			
reason to believe, lay to the northeast of Van Diemen's Land. I		 
discovered nothing all that day; but upon the next, about three o'clock			
in the afternoon, when I had, by my computation, made twenty-four			
leagues from Blefuscu, I descried a sail steering to the southeast: my 	 
course was due east. I hailed her, but could get no answer; yet I found	 	
I gained upon her, for the wind slackened. I made all the sail I could,		 
and in half-an-hour she spied me, then hung out her ancient,[37] and 	 
discharged a gun.   
		 
It is not easy to express the joy I was in, upon the unexpected hope of			
once more seeing my beloved country, and the dear pledges I left in it.			
The ship slackened her sails, and I came up with her, between five and  	
six in the evening, September twenty-sixth; but my heart leaped within			
me to see her English colors. I put my cows and sheep into my 	 
coat-pockets, and got on board with all my little cargo of provisions.  	
The vessel was an English merchantman returning from Japan by the North 	 
and South Seas; the captain, Mr. John Biddle, of Deptford, a very civil	  
man and an excellent sailor. We were now in the latitude of 30 degrees 	 
south. There were about fifty men in the ship; and here I met an old			
comrade of mine, one Peter Williams, who gave me a good character to  	
the captain. This gentleman treated me with kindness, and desired I 		
would let him know what place I came from last, and whither I was bound;		 
which I did in few words, but he thought I was raving, and that the 		
dangers I had underwent had disturbed my head; whereupon I took my black 	 
cattle and sheep out of my pocket, which, after great astonishment,	  
clearly convinced him of my veracity. I then showed him the gold given	  
me by the emperor of Blefuscu, together with his majesty's picture at 		
full length, and some other rareties of that country. I gave him two   
purses of two hundred _sprugs_ each, and promised, when we arrived in	 	
England, to make him a present of a cow and a sheep.		 
 	 
[Illustration]		 
	  
I shall not trouble the reader with a particular account of this voyage,			
which was very prosperous for the most part. We arrived in the Downs[38]  	
on the thirteenth of April, 1702. I had only one misfortune, that the  	
rats on board carried away one of my sheep; I found her bones in a hole,			
picked clean from the flesh. I got the rest of my cattle safe ashore, 	 
and set them a-grazing in a bowling-green at Greenwich, where the  	
fineness of the grass made them feed very heartily, though I had always 		
feared the contrary: neither could I possibly have preserved them in so	  
long a voyage, if the captain had not allowed me some of his best		 
biscuits, which, rubbed to powder, and mingled with water, was their	 	
constant food. The short time I continued in England, I made a	 	
considerable profit by showing my cattle to many persons of quality and			
others: and before I began my second voyage I sold them for six hundred		 
pounds.   
		 
Since my last return, I find the breed is considerably increased,	  
especially the sheep, which I hope will prove much to the advantage of	  
the woollen manufacture, by the fineness of the fleeces.  	
   
[Illustration]	 	
 	 
I stayed but two months with my wife and family; for my insatiable  	
desire of seeing foreign countries would suffer me to continue no	 	
longer. I left fifteen hundred pounds with my wife and fixed her in a	  
good house at Redriff. My remaining stock I carried with me, part in 		
money, and part in goods, in hopes to improve my fortune. My eldest  	
uncle, John, had left me an estate in land, near Epping, of about thirty  	
pounds a year; and I had a long lease of the "Black Bull[39]," in	 	
Fetter Lane, which yielded me as much more: so that I was not in any 	 
danger of leaving my family upon the parish. My son Johnny, named so 	 
after his uncle, was at the grammar-school, and a towardly[40] child. My 		
daughter Betty (who is now well married, and has children), was then at	  
her needlework. I took leave of my wife and boy and girl, with tears on		 
both sides, and went on board the "Adventure," a merchant ship of three 		
hundred tons, bound for Surat, Captain John Nicholas, of Liverpool,	 	
commander. But my account of this voyage must be referred to the second  	
part of my travels.			
 		
THE END OF THE FIRST PART.			
	  
[Illustration: "THEY CONCLUDED ... THAT I WAS ONLY _Relplum	  
Scalcath_," P. 37.]	 	
  	
[Illustration]	 	
 	 
TRAVELS. 	 
  	
       *       *       *       *       *	  
 	 
			
  	
 		
PART II. 	 
 	 
_A VOYAGE TO BROBDINGNAG_.   
	  
       *       *       *       *       *	  
 		
	 	
			
		 
CHAPTER I.  	
 		
     A GREAT STORM DESCRIBED; THE LONG-BOAT SENT TO FETCH WATER; THE	  
     AUTHOR GOES WITH IT TO DISCOVER THE COUNTRY. HE IS LEFT ON SHORE,	 	
     IS SEIZED BY ONE OF THE NATIVES, AND CARRIED TO A FARMER'S HOUSE.			
     HIS RECEPTION, WITH SEVERAL ACCIDENTS THAT HAPPENED THERE. A  	
     DESCRIPTION OF THE INHABITANTS.	 	
 		
 		
Having been condemned by nature and fortune to an active and restless			
life, in two months after my return I again left my native country, and	  
took shipping in the Downs on the twentieth day of June, 1702, in the 		
"Adventure," Captain John Nicholas, a Cornish man, commander, bound for			
Surat. We had a very prosperous gale till we arrived at the Cape of Good  	
Hope, where we landed for fresh water; but, discovering a leak, we			
unshipped our goods and wintered there: for, the captain falling sick of 	 
an ague, we could not leave the Cape till the end of March. We then set  	
sail, and had a good voyage till we passed the Straits of	  
Madagascar;[41] but having got northward of that island, and to about	  
five degrees south latitude, the winds, which in those seas are observed 		
to blow a constant equal gale, between the north and west, from the  	
beginning of December to the beginning of May, on the nineteenth of	 	
April began to blow with much greater violence and more westerly than			
usual, continuing so for twenty days together, during which time we were		 
driven a little to the east of the Molucca Islands, and about three 		
degrees northward of the line,[42] as our captain found by an	  
observation he took the second of May, at which time the wind ceased and	  
it was a perfect calm; whereat I was not a little rejoiced. But, he,	  
being a man well experienced in the navigation of those seas, bid us all  	
prepare against a storm, which accordingly happened the day following:  	
for the southern wind, called the southern monsoon, began to set in, and	 	
soon it was a fierce storm.		 
 		
Finding it was like to overblow, we took in our sprit-sail, and stood by 	 
to hand the foresail; but making foul weather, we looked the guns were		 
all fast, and handed the mizzen.			
			
[Illustration]  	
  	
The ship lay very broad off, so we thought it better spooning before			
the sea, than trying, or hulling. We reefed the foresail and set him, we   
hauled aft the foresheet: the helm was hard-a-weather. The ship wore			
bravely. We belayed the fore down-haul; but the sail was split, and we		 
hauled down the yard, and got the sail into the ship, and unbound all 		
the things clear of it. It was a very fierce storm; the sea broke  	
strange and dangerous. We hauled off the laniard of the whipstaff, and	  
helped the man at the helm. We could not get down our topmast, but let	 	
all stand, because she scudded before the sea very well, and we knew			
that the topmast being aloft, the ship was the wholesomer, and made   
better way through the sea, seeing we had sea-room. When the storm was			
over, we set foresail and mainsail, and brought the ship to. Then we set	  
the mizzen, main-top-sail, and the fore-top-sail. Our course was east		 
north east, the wind was at southwest. We got the starboard tacks			
aboard, we cast off our weather braces and lifts; we set in the lee  	
braces, and hauled forward by the weather bowlings, and hauled them   
tight and belayed them, and hauled over the mizzen tack to wind-ward and		 
kept her full and by, as near as she could lie.  	
   
During this storm, which was followed by a strong wind, west southwest,	  
we were carried, by my computation, about five hundred leagues to the 		
east, so that the oldest sailor on board could not tell in what part of			
the world we were. Our provisions held out well, our ship was staunch,	  
and our crew all in good health; but we lay in the utmost distress for			
water. We thought it best to hold on the same course, rather than turn			
more northerly, which might have brought us to the northwest parts of  	
Great Tartary, and into the Frozen Sea.			
	  
On the sixteenth day of June, 1703, a boy on the topmast discovered	  
land. On the seventeenth, we came in full view of a great island or	 	
continent (for we knew not which), on the south side whereof was a small  	
neck of land, jutting out into the sea, and a creek too shallow to hold 		
a ship of above one hundred tons. We cast anchor within a league of this 		
creek, and our captain sent a dozen of his men well armed in the  	
long-boat, with vessels for water, if any could be found. I desired his  	
leave to go with them, that I might see the country, and make what	  
discoveries I could. 	 
  	
When we came to land, we saw no river or spring, nor any sign of	  
inhabitants. Our men therefore wandered on the shore to find out some			
fresh water near the sea, and I walked alone about a mile on the other 	 
side, where I observed the country all barren and rocky. I now began to 		
be weary, and seeing nothing to entertain my curiosity, I returned		 
gently down toward the creek; and the sea being full in my view, I saw	  
our men already got into the boat, and rowing for life to the ship. I		 
was going to holla after them, although it had been to little purpose,			
when I observed a huge creature walking after them in the sea, as fast	  
as he could; he waded not much deeper than his knees, and took	 	
prodigious strides; but our men had the start of him about half a 	 
league, and the sea thereabouts being full of pointed rocks, the monster 	 
was not able to overtake the boat. This I was afterwards told, for I 		
durst not stay to see the issue of the adventure; but ran as fast as I		 
could the way I first went, and then climbed up a steep hill, which gave			
me some prospect of the country. I found it fully cultivated; but that			
which first surprised me was the length of the grass, which, in those  	
grounds that seemed to be kept for hay, was about twenty feet high.			
 	 
[Illustration: "A HUGE CREATURE WALKING ... IN THE SEA." P. 6.]  	
 		
I fell into a high road, for so I took it to be, though it served to the		 
inhabitants only as a footpath through a field of barley. Here I walked			
on for some time, but could see little on either side, it being now near			
harvest, and the corn rising at least forty feet. I was an hour walking   
to the end of this field, which was fenced in with a hedge of at least	 	
one hundred and twenty feet high, and the trees so lofty that I could		 
make no computation of their altitude. There was a stile to pass from 	 
this field into the next. It had four steps, and a stone to cross over			
when you came to the uppermost. It was impossible for me to climb this	  
stile because every step was six feet high, and the upper stone above		 
twenty.	 	
	 	
I was endeavoring to find some gap in the hedge, when I discovered one			
of the inhabitants in the next field, advancing towards the stile, of		 
the same size with him whom I saw in the sea pursuing our boat. He 		
appeared as tall as an ordinary spire steeple, and took about ten yards 		
at every stride, as near as I could guess. I was struck with the utmost	  
fear and astonishment, and ran to hide myself in the corn, from whence I	  
saw him at the top of the stile, looking back into the next field on the  	
right hand, and heard him call in a voice many degrees louder than a  	
speaking trumpet; but the noise was so high in the air that at first I   
certainly thought it was thunder. Whereupon seven monsters, like 	 
himself, came towards him with reaping-hooks in their hands, each hook  	
about the largeness of six scythes. These people were not so well clad	 	
as the first, whose servants or laborers they seemed to be; for, upon		 
some words he spoke, they went to reap the corn in the field where I	  
lay. I kept from them at as great a distance as I could, but was forced 		
to move, with extreme difficulty, for the stalks of the corn were  	
sometimes not above a foot distance, so that I could hardly squeeze my	 	
body betwixt them. However, I made a shift to go forward till I came to		 
a part of the field where the corn had been laid by the rain and wind.	 	
Here it was impossible for me to advance a step; for the stalks were so			
interwoven that I could not creep through, and the beards of the fallen		 
ears so strong and pointed that they pierced through my clothes into my 		
flesh. At the same time I heard the reapers not above a hundred yards 		
behind me. 		
	  
Being quite dispirited with toil, and wholly overcome by grief and 	 
despair, I lay down between two ridges, and heartily wished I might	 	
there end my days. I bemoaned my desolate widow and fatherless children.   
I lamented my own folly and wilfulness in attempting a second voyage	  
against the advice of all my friends and relations. In this terrible 	 
agitation of mind, I could not forbear thinking of Lilliput, whose			
inhabitants looked upon me as the greatest prodigy that ever appeared in  	
the world; where I was able to draw an imperial fleet in my hand, and			
perform those other actions which will be recorded forever in the 	 
chronicles of that empire, while posterity shall hardly believe them,  	
although attested by millions. I reflected what a mortification it must		 
prove to me to appear as inconsiderable in this nation as one single	 	
Lilliputian would be among us. But this I conceived was to be among the		 
least of my misfortunes: for, as human creatures are observed to be more  	
savage and cruel in proportion to their bulk, what could I expect but to   
be a morsel in the mouth of the first among these enormous barbarians			
that should happen to seize me? Undoubtedly philosophers are in the		 
right when they tell us that nothing is great or little otherwise than 		
by comparison. It might have pleased fortune to let the Lilliputians		 
find some nation where the people were as diminutive with respect to	  
them as they were to me. And who knows but that even this prodigious			
race of mortals might be equally overmatched in some distant part of the	 	
world, whereof we have yet no discovery?	  
	  
Scared and confounded as I was, I could not forbear going on with these		 
reflections, when one of the reapers, approaching within ten yards of 	 
the ridge where I lay, made me apprehend that with the next step I	 	
should be squashed to death under his foot, or cut in two with his	  
reaping-hook. And, therefore, when he was again about to move, I 	 
screamed as loud as fear could make me. Whereupon the huge creature trod  	
short, and looking round about under him for some time, at last espied  	
me as I lay on the ground. He considered awhile, with the caution of one		 
who endeavors to lay hold on a small dangerous animal in such a manner			
that it shall not be able either to scratch or to bite him, as I myself   
have sometimes done with a weasel in England.			
	 	
[Illustration: "WHEREUPON THE HUGE CREATURE TROD SHORT." P. 10.]		 
 		
At length he ventured to take me up between his forefinger and thumb, 	 
and brought me within three yards of his eyes, that he might behold my		 
shape more perfectly. I guessed his meaning, and my good fortune gave me 	 
so much presence of mind that I resolved not to struggle in the least as 	 
he held me in the air, above sixty feet from the ground, although he 	 
grievously pinched my sides, for fear I should slip through his fingers.		 
All I ventured was to raise my eyes towards the sun, and place my 	 
hands together in a supplicating posture, and to speak some words in an 		
humble melancholy tone, suitable to the condition I then was in. For I 	 
apprehended every moment that he would dash me against the ground, as we			
usually do any little hateful animal which we have a mind to destroy. 		
But my good star would have it that he appeared pleased with my voice   
and gestures, and began to look upon me as a curiosity, much wondering			
to hear me pronounce articulate words, although he could not understand		 
them. In the meantime I was not able to forbear groaning and shedding 		
tears, and turning my head towards my sides; letting him know, as well	 	
as I could, how cruelly I was hurt by the pressure of his thumb and 		
finger. He seemed to apprehend my meaning; for, lifting up the lappet of		 
his coat, he put me gently into it, and immediately ran along with me to		 
his master, who was a substantial farmer, and the same person I had 	 
first seen in the field. 	 
	 	
The farmer, having (as I suppose by their talk) received such an account 		
of me as his servant could give him, took a piece of a small straw,  	
about the size of a walking-staff, and therewith lifted up the lappets  	
of my coat, which it seems he thought to be some kind of covering that  	
nature had given me. He blew my hair aside, to take a better view of my 	 
face. He called his hinds[43] about him, and asked them (as I afterwards  	
learned) whether they had ever seen in the fields any little creature 	 
that resembled me. He then placed me softly on the ground upon all	  
fours, but I got immediately up, and walked slowly backwards and		 
forwards to let those people see that I had no intent to run away.	 	
  	
They all sat down in a circle about me, the better to observe my 	 
motions. I pulled off my hat, and made a low bow towards the farmer. I		 
fell on my knees, and lifted up my hands and eyes, and spoke several 	 
words as loud as I could: I took a purse of gold out of my pocket, and 		
humbly presented it to him. He received it on the palm of his hand, then	  
applied it close to his eye to see what it was, and afterwards turned it 	 
several times with the point of a pin (which he took out of his sleeve), 		
but could make nothing of it. Whereupon I made a sign that he should 		
place his hand on the ground. I then took the purse, and opening it,	 	
poured all the gold into his palm. There were six Spanish pieces, of		 
four pistoles[44] each, besides twenty or thirty smaller coins. I saw 		
him wet the tip of his little finger upon his tongue, and take up one of 	 
my largest pieces, and then another, but he seemed to be wholly ignorant		 
what they were. He made me a sign to put them again into my purse, and 	 
the purse again into my pocket, which, after offering it to him several			
times, I thought it best to do.  	
	 	
The farmer by this time was convinced I must be a rational creature. He		 
spoke often to me, but the sound of his voice pierced my ears like that			
of a water-mill, yet his words were articulate enough. I answered as 		
loud as I could in several languages, and he often laid his ear within	  
two yards of me; but all in vain, for we were wholly unintelligible to			
each other. He then sent his servants to their work, and taking his 		
handkerchief out of his pocket, he doubled and spread it on his left  	
hand, which he placed flat on the ground, with the palm upwards, making	  
me a sign to step into it, as I could easily do, for it was not above a 		
foot in thickness.  	
		 
I thought it my part to obey, and, for fear of falling, laid myself at	 	
full length upon the handkerchief, with the remainder of which he lapped	 	
me up to the head for farther security, and in this manner carried me 		
home to his house. There he called his wife, and showed me to her; but  	
she screamed and ran back, as women in England do at the sight of a toad   
or a spider. However, when she had awhile seen my behavior, and how well 		
I observed the signs her husband made, she was soon reconciled, and by  	
degrees grew extremely tender of me. 		
	 	
It was about twelve at noon, and a servant brought in dinner. It was  	
only one substantial dish of meat (fit for the plain condition of an 		
husbandman) in a dish of about four-and-twenty feet diameter. The  	
company were the farmer and his wife, three children, and an old   
grandmother. When they were sat down, the farmer placed me at some		 
distance from him on the table, which was thirty feet high from the	 	
floor. I was in a terrible fright, and kept as far as I could from the   
edge for fear of falling. The wife minced a bit of meat, then crumbled	 	
some bread on a trencher,[45] and placed it before me. I made her a low 	 
bow, took out my knife and fork, and fell to eat, which gave them	 	
exceeding delight.	  
		 
The mistress sent her maid for a small dram cup, which held about three		 
gallons, and filled it with drink: I took up the vessel with much	 	
difficulty in both hands, and in a most respectful manner drank to her   
ladyship's health, expressing the words as loud as I could in English,	  
which made the company laugh so heartily that I was almost deafened by 	 
the noise. This liquor tasted like a small cider, and was not			
unpleasant. Then the master made me a sign to come to his trencher-side;   
but as I walked on the table, being in great surprise all the time, as		 
the indulgent reader will easily conceive and excuse, I happened to 		
stumble against a crust, and fell flat on my face, but received no hurt.  	
I got up immediately, and observing the good people to be in much	  
concern, I took my hat (which I held under my arm out of good manners),	  
and, waving it over my head, made three huzzas, to show that I had got		 
no mischief by my fall.	 	
  	
But advancing forwards towards my master (as I shall henceforth call  	
him), his youngest son, who sat next him, an arch boy of about ten years 	 
old, took me up by the legs, and held me so high in the air, that I		 
trembled in every limb; but his father snatched me from him, and at the   
same time gave him such a box in the left ear as would have felled an	 	
European troop of horse to the earth, ordering him to be taken from the  	
table. But being afraid the boy might owe me a spite, and well			
remembering how mischievous all children among us naturally are to 	 
sparrows, rabbits, young kittens, and puppy dogs, I fell on my knees, 	 
and, pointing to the boy, made my master to understand as well as I		 
could, that I desired his son might be pardoned. The father complied,	  
and the lad took his seat again; whereupon I went to him and kissed his		 
hand, which my master took, and made him stroke me gently with it.	 	
	 	
In the midst of dinner, my mistress's favorite cat leapt into her lap. I 		
heard a noise behind me like that of a dozen stocking-weavers at work;   
and, turning my head, I found it proceeded from the purring of that	 	
animal, who seemed to be three times larger than an ox, as I computed by 		
the view of her head and one of her paws, while her mistress was feeding  	
and stroking her. The fierceness of this creature's countenance 	 
altogether discomposed me, though I stood at the further end of the		 
table, above fifty feet off, and although my mistress held her fast, for 		
fear she might give a spring and seize me in her talons.			
  	
But it happened there was no danger; for the cat took not the least	 	
notice of me, when my master placed me within three yards of her. And as 	 
I have been always told, and found true by experience in my travels,			
that flying or discovering[46] fear before a fierce animal is a certain   
way to make it pursue or attack you, so I resolved in this dangerous	 	
juncture to show no manner of concern. I walked with intrepidity five or 		
six times before the very head of the cat, and came within half a yard			
of her; whereupon she drew herself back, as if she were more afraid of 	 
me. I had less apprehension concerning the dogs, whereof three or four			
came into the room, as it is usual in farmers' houses; one of which was		 
a mastiff equal in bulk to four elephants, and a greyhound somewhat  	
taller than the mastiff, but not so large.  	
	  
When dinner was almost done, the nurse came in with a child of a year	 	
old in her arms, who immediately spied me, and began a squall that you	 	
might have heard from London Bridge to Chelsea,[47] after the usual 		
oratory of infants, to get me for a plaything. The mother out of pure		 
indulgence took me up, and put me towards the child, who presently			
seized me by the middle and got my head in its mouth, where I roared so  	
loud that the urchin was frighted, and let me drop, and I should 		
infallibly have broke my neck if the mother had not held her apron	 	
under me. The nurse, to quiet her babe, made use of a rattle, which was	  
a kind of hollow vessel filled with great stones, and fastened by a			
cable to the child's waist. As she sat down close to the table on which 		
I stood, her appearance astonished me not a little. This made me reflect		 
upon the fair skins of our English ladies, who appear so beautiful to		 
us, only because they are of our own size, and their defects not to be 	 
seen but through a magnifying glass, where we find by experiment that   
the smoothest and whitest skins look rough, and coarse and ill-colored.	  
 		
I remember, when I was at Lilliput, the complexions of those diminutive  	
people appeared to me the fairest in the world; and talking upon this   
subject with a person of learning there, who was an intimate friend of 		
mine, he said that my face appeared much fairer and smoother when he 		
looked on me from the ground than it did upon a nearer view, when I took		 
him up in my hand and brought him close, which he confessed was at first	 	
a very shocking sight. He said he could discover great holes in my skin;	  
that the stumps of my beard were ten times stronger than the bristles of 		
a boar, and my complexion made up of several colors altogether	 	
disagreeable: although I must beg leave to say for myself that I am as 		
fair as most of my sex and country, and very little sunburnt by my			
travels. On the other side, discoursing of the ladies of that emperor's 	 
court, he used to tell me one had freckles, another too wide a mouth, a	 	
third too large a nose, nothing of which I was able to distinguish. I   
confess this reflection was obvious enough; which, however, I could not	  
forbear, lest the reader might think those vast creatures were actually  	
deformed: for I must do them justice to say they are a comely race of	 	
people; and particularly the features of my master's countenance, 	 
although he were but a farmer, when I beheld him from the height of			
sixty feet, appeared very well proportioned.		 
			
When dinner was done my master went out to his labors, and, as I could	 	
discover by his voice and gestures, gave his wife a strict charge to	  
take care of me. I was very much tired and disposed to sleep, which, my		 
mistress perceiving, she put me on her own bed, and covered me with a	 	
clean white handkerchief, but larger and coarser than the mainsail of a 		
man-of-war. 	 
			
I slept about two hours, and dreamed I was at home with my wife and  	
children, which aggravated my sorrows when I awaked and found myself   
alone in a vast room, between two and three hundred feet wide, and above	  
two hundred high, lying in a bed twenty yards wide. My mistress was gone			
about her household affairs, and had locked me in. The bed was eight  	
yards from the floor. 	 
 		
[Illustration: "I ... DREW MY HANGER TO DEFEND MYSELF." P. 18.]		 
		 
Presently two rats crept up the curtains, and ran smelling backwards and 		
forwards on my bed. One of them came almost up to my face; whereupon I	  
rose in a fright, and drew out my hanger to defend myself. The horrible 		
animals had the boldness to attack me both sides, and one of them held 		
his forefeet at my collar; but I killed him before he could do me any 	 
mischief. He fell down at my feet; and the other, seeing the fate of his	  
comrade, made his escape, but not without one good wound on the back,		 
which I gave him as he fled, and made the blood run trickling from him.   
After this exploit I walked gently to and fro on the bed to recover my	 	
breath and loss of spirits. These creatures were of the size of a large	  
mastiff, but infinitely more nimble and fierce; so that, if I had		 
taken off my belt before I went to sleep, I must infallibly have been	 	
torn to pieces and devoured. I measured the tail of the dead rat, and 		
found it to be two yards long wanting an inch; but it went against my 	 
stomach to draw the carcase off the bed, where it still lay bleeding. I		 
observed it had yet some life; but, with a strong slash across the neck,		 
I thoroughly despatched it.			
		 
I hope the gentle reader will excuse me for dwelling on these and the	  
like particulars, which, however insignificant they may appear to  	
grovelling vulgar minds, yet will certainly help a philosopher to  	
enlarge his thoughts and imagination, and apply them to the benefit of	 	
public as well as private life, which was my sole design in presenting		 
this and other accounts of my travels to the world; wherein I have been  	
chiefly studious of truth, without affecting any ornaments of teaming or			
style. But the whole scene of this voyage made so strong an impression	  
on my mind, and is so deeply memory, that in committing it to paper I		 
did not omit one material circumstance. However, upon a strict review, I 		
blotted out several passages of less moment which were in my first copy,	  
for fear of being censured as tedious and trifling, whereof travellers	  
are often, perhaps not without justice, accused. 	 
	 	
 		
	 	
			
CHAPTER II.  	
  	
     A DESCRIPTION OF THE FARMER'S DAUGHTER. THE AUTHOR CARRIED TO A 		
     MARKET-TOWN, AND THEN TO THE METROPOLIS. THE PARTICULARS OF THIS 		
     JOURNEY.  	
   
	  
My mistress had a daughter of nine years old, a child of toward parts  	
for her age, very dexterous at her needle, and skilful in dressing her	 	
baby. Her mother and she contrived to fit up the baby's cradle for me	  
against night. The cradle was put into a small drawer cabinet, and the		 
drawer placed upon a hanging shelf for fear of the rats. This was my bed		 
all the time I stayed with these people, though made more convenient by			
degrees, as I began to learn their language and make my wants known.		 
	  
She made me seven shirts, and some other linen, of as fine cloth as 		
could be got, which indeed was coarser than sackcloth; and these she 		
constantly washed for me with her own hands. She was likewise my 	 
school-mistress, to teach me the language. When I pointed to anything,	 	
she told me the name of it in her own tongue, so that in a few days I 	 
was able to call for whatever I had a mind to. She was very			
good-natured, and not above forty feet high, being little for her age.   
She gave me the name of Grildrig, which the family took up, and	  
afterwards the whole kingdom. The word imports what the Latins call 		
_nanunculus_, the Italians _homunceletino_, and the English _mannikin_.	 	
To her I chiefly owe my preservation in that country. We never parted  	
while I was there; I called her my Glumdalclitch, or little nurse; and 		
should be guilty of great ingratitude if I omitted this honorable		 
mention of her care and affection towards me, which I heartily wish it			
lay in my power to requite as she deserves.   
		 
It now began to be known and talked of in the neighborhood, that my 		
master had found a strange animal in the field, about the bigness of a			
_splacnuck_, but exactly shaped in every part like a human creature;  	
which it likewise imitated in all its actions, seemed to speak in a   
little language of its own, had already learned several words of theirs,			
went erect upon two legs, was tame and gentle, would come when it was  	
called, do whatever it was bid, had the finest limbs in the world, and a			
complexion fairer than a nobleman's daughter of three years old. Another	  
farmer, who lived hard by, and was a particular friend of my master, 		
came on a visit on purpose to inquire into the truth of this story. I  	
was immediately produced and placed upon a table, where I walked as I   
was commanded, drew my hanger, put it up again, made my reverence to my	 	
master's guest, asked him in his own language how he did, and told him		 
_he was welcome_, just as my little nurse had instructed me. This man,  	
who was old and dim-sighted, put on his spectacles to behold me better, 		
at which I could not forbear laughing very heartily, for his eyes	  
appeared like the full moon shining into a chamber at two windows. Our 		
people, who discovered the cause of my mirth, bore me company in  	
laughing, at which the old fellow was fool enough to be angry and out of   
countenance. He had the character of a great miser; and, to my		 
misfortune, he well deserved it by the cursed advice he gave my 		
master, to show me as a sight upon a market-day in the next town, which  	
was half an hour's riding, about two-and-twenty miles from our house. I			
guessed there was some mischief contriving, when I observed my master	  
and his friend whispering long together, sometimes pointing at me; and	  
my fears made me fancy that I overheard and understood some of their 		
words.	  
			
[Illustration: "I CALLED HER MY GLUMDALCLITCH." P. 22.] 	 
   
But the next morning, Glumdalclitch, my little nurse, told me the whole			
matter, which she had cunningly picked out from her mother. The poor	  
girl laid me on her bosom, and fell a-weeping with shame and grief. She 		
apprehended some mischief would happen to me from rude vulgar folks, who  	
might squeeze me to death, or break one of my limbs by taking me in 		
their hands. She had also observed how modest I was in my nature, how	  
nicely I regarded my honor, and what an indignity conceive it to be		 
exposed for money, as a public spectacle, to the meanest of the people.	 	
She said her papa and mamma had promised that Grildrig should be hers,		 
but now she found they meant to serve her as they did last year when		 
they pretended to give her a lamb, and yet as soon as it was fat sold it	 	
to a butcher. For my own part I may truly affirm that I was less  	
concerned than my nurse. I had a strong hope, which left me, that I 		
should one day recover my liberty; to the ignominy of being carried		 
about for a monster, I considered myself to be a perfect stranger in the 	 
country, and that such a misfortune could never be charged upon me as a	  
reproach if ever I should return to England; since the king of Great			
Britain himself, in my condition, must have undergone the same distress.	  
		 
My master, pursuant to the advice of his friend, carried me in a box			
the next market-day, to the neighboring town, and took along with him   
his little daughter, my nurse, upon a pillion[48] behind him. The box 		
was close on every side, with a little door for me to go in and out, and 	 
a few gimlet holes to let in air. The girl had been so careful as to put			
the quilt of her baby's bed into it, for me to lie down on. However, I   
was terribly shaken and discomposed in this journey, though it were but	 	
of half an hour. For the horse went about forty feet at every step, and  	
trotted so high that the agitation was equal to the rising and falling 		
of a ship in a great storm, but much more frequent; our journey was 	 
somewhat farther than from London to St. Alban's. My master alighted at	 	
an inn which he used to frequent; and after consulting a while with the 	 
innkeeper and making some necessary preparations, he hired the		 
_grultrud_, or crier, to give notice through the town, of a strange 	 
creature to be seen at the sign of the Green Eagle, not so big as a	  
_splacnuck_ (an animal in that country, very finely shaped, about six	  
feet long), and in every part of the body resembling a human creature,	 	
could speak several words, and perform a hundred diverting tricks.	  
	  
I was placed upon a table in the largest room of the inn, which might be 	 
near three hundred feet square. My little nurse stood on a low stool		 
close to the table, to take care of me, and direct what I should do. My			
master, to avoid a crowd, would suffer only thirty people at a time to	 	
see me. I walked about on the table as the girl commanded. She asked me		 
questions, as far as she knew my understanding of the language reached, 		
and I answered them as loud as I could. I turned about several times to  	
the company, paid my humble respects, said they were welcome, and used 	 
some other speeches I had been taught. I took a thimble filled with		 
liquor, which Glumdalclitch had given me for a cup, and drank their  	
health. I drew out my hanger, and flourished with it, after the manner		 
of fencers in England. My nurse gave me part of a straw, which I	 	
exercised as a pike, having learnt the art in my youth. I was that day	 	
shown to twelve sets of company, and as often forced to act over again			
the same fopperies, till I was half dead with weariness and vexation.  	
For those who had seen me made such wonderful reports, that the people		 
were ready to break down the doors to come in.		 
	  	 		  				 	  		 	 	 			 			 					 	 	 		  	 		  				  		 					 	 		  			  	 		  	 	 		 		 	   					 		 		 	   		 		    	 		 	 		  		 	    	   		 		 		    	  			  		  			 	   	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 					 	  	 		  			  	 		 		 		    	 				 	 	